add github actions with powershell scripts (#5724)
umbraco/UmbracoDocs: umbraco-cloud/set-up/project-settings/umbraco-cicd/samplecicdpipeline/github-actions-pwsh.md

---
description: >-
  This section provides a step-by-step guide to setting up a CI/CD pipeline in
  GitHub Actions using the provided sample Powershell scripts.
---

# GitHub Actions with Powershell scripts

Before setting up the pipeline in GitHub, make sure that the steps in the [Configuring a CI/CD pipeline](./) are done.

You will need to define your pipeline in YAML, and find a way to interact with the Umbraco Cloud Api.

> {% hint style="info" %}

Reviewer: it's not rendered correctly in the preview

> We have created a sample pipeline for GitHub. It includes YAML-files and custom PowerShell scripts to interact with the Umbraco Cloud API.

Reviewer: okay I added too many comments about this but the spelling of API, Api, api is not consistent
also Powershell and PowerShell
also Devops and DevOps 
I think they should be uniform

Author: API not Api 
Powershell not PowerShell
Azure DevOps not Azure Devops
GitHub not Github
when they are used in sentences

You can get the samples for GitHub and Azure Devops from this [repository](https://GitHub.com/umbraco/Umbraco.Cloud.CICDFlow.Samples).

For GitHub you will need the following files:
- From `powershell` folder
  - `Get-LatestDeployment.ps1`
  - `Get-ChangesById.ps1`
  - `New-Deployment.ps1`
  - `Add-DeploymentPackage.ps1`
  - `Start-Deployment.ps1`
  - `Test-DeploymentStatus.ps1`
- From the `powershell/github` folder
  - `main.yml`
  - `cloud-sync.yml` 
  - `cloud-deployment.yml`

> - From the root folder

Reviewer: I think this should be the first item in the list due to the folder hierarchy

  - `cloud.zipignore`

{% endhint %}

## Import Cloud project repository to GitHub
Go to your repositories in GitHub and click on "New".

- Create a new empty repository in GitHub, and note down the clone URL.
- Go to the Umbraco Cloud Portal and clone your cloud project down locally. [This article](../../../working-locally.md#cloning-an-umbraco-cloud-project) describes how you can find the clone URL.

> - Now working locally remove the Git Remote called `origin``, which points to Umbraco Cloud

Reviewer: backticks dont match for origin

 ```sh 
 git remote remove origin
 ```

- Optionally rename branch `master` to `main`

 ```sh 
 # optional step
 git branch -m  main
 git symbolic-ref HEAD refs/heads/main
 ```

- Add a new remote called origin and pointing to the GitHub clone URL

 ```sh 
 git remote add origin https://github.com/{your-organization}/{your-repository}.git
 ```

- Push local repository to Github

Now we can move on to setting up a pipeline.

> ## Set up Github

Reviewer: Set up GitHub ... pipeline?

The pipeline needs to know which Umbraco Cloud project to deploy to. In order to do this you will need the `Project ID` and the `API Key`. [This article](README.md#obtaining-the-project-id-and-api-key) describes how to get those values.

- Create a new repository in GitHub
- Now go to the repository in GitHub, and click on the Settings section.
- Expand secrets and variables in the left-hand menu titled Security and click on Actions.

<figure><img src="../../../../.gitbook/assets/image (6).png" alt=""><figcaption><p>Security and Actions menu GitHub</p></figcaption></figure>

- Create a `repository secret` called `UMBRACO_CLOUD_API_KEY` with the `API Key` value from the Umbraco Portal.
- Create a `repository variable` with the name `PROJECT_ID` and the value `Project ID` value from the Umbraco Portal.

> {% hint style="info" %}

Reviewer: this isn't rendered correctly

If you want to use other names for the variable or secret, you need to rename the environment variables in `main.yml`.

```yaml
env:
  projectId: ${{ vars.PROJECT_ID }} # change the part inside the curly braces
  umbracoCloudApiKey: ${{ secrets.UMBRACO_CLOUD_API_KEY }} # change the part inside the curly braces
```

{% endhint %}

Now Github is set up with all the needed information to be able to deploy your Cloud project back to Umbraco Cloud.

## Set up the GitHub Actions pipeline

While working with the project on you local machine, do the following to prepare the pipeline.
- Copy the `cloud.zipignore` file to the root of your repository
- Make a copy of the `.gitignore` and call it `cloud.gitignore`

>   - Both files should be in the root of your repository

Author: note for Jesper so he remembers:
add a line about gitignore the git-patch.diff file non cloud .gitignore

- Also in the root, create a folder called `.github`
- Inside `.github` create two additional folders
  - `workflows`
  - `powershell`
- Copy the 3 YAML files into the `workflows` folder
  - Update the `main.yml` to point to the two other YAML files `cloud-sync.yml` and `cloud-deployment.yml` inside your repository
- Copy the Powershell scripts to the `powershell` folder
- Commit the all changes, and push to GitHub

The push will start a new pipeline run.

## High level overview of the pipeline components

The scripts are provided as a starting point. It is recommended that you familiarize yourself with the scripts and with documentation related to how to use GitHub Actions.

> The scripts demonstrates two thing:

Reviewer: demonstrates the following:

 - How to sync your GitHub repository with the left-most project environment in Umbraco Cloud
 - How to deploy changes to the left-most project environment in Umbraco Cloud 

### Main

The `main.yml` is the main pipeline, and is the one that will be triggered on a push to `main` branch.

> You can configure different trigger behavior in this file.

Reviewer: a different trigger behavior

You can add your Build and Test jobs between the `cloud-sync` and `cloud-deployment` jobs. 
Keep in mind that you do not need to retain the dotnet build artifact for upload later. The `cloud-deployment` job will take care of packaging all your source code and upload to Umbraco Cloud. 

### Cloud-sync

The `cloud-sync.yml` shows how you can sync your Github repository with the left-most environment of your Cloud project.

> In this sample, it accepts any change from the api and applies and commits it back to the branch which triggered the pipeline. But the commit does not trigger the pipeline again.

Reviewer: "However, " instead of but

If you don't want the pipeline to commit back to the triggering branch, this is where you need to change the pipeline. 

### Cloud-deployment

The `cloud.deployment.yml` show how you can deploy your repository to the left-most environment of your Cloud project.

> The sample shows how to prepare for deployment, request the deployment and await for cloud to finish.

Reviewer: wait for
or await

---
description: >-
  This section provides a step-by-step guide to setting up a CI/CD pipeline in
  GitHub Actions using the provided sample Powershell scripts.
---

# GitHub Actions using Powershell scripts

Before setting up the pipeline in GitHub, make sure that the following steps from the [Configuring a CI/CD pipeline](./) are done:
- Use an existing Cloud project or create a new one
- Activate CI/CD Flow

You will need to define your pipeline in YAML, and find a way to interact with the Umbraco Cloud API.

{% hint style="info" %}
The Umbraco CI/CD Team have created a sample pipeline for GitHub Actions. 

The Scripts are provided as is. This means that the scripts will do the bare minimum for a pipeline that is utilizing the CI/CD flow. Adapt and integrate them into your own pipelines to gain the ability to do deployments to your Umbraco Cloud projects.

The sample includes YAML-files and custom Powershell scripts to interact with the Umbraco Cloud API.

> You can get the samples for GitHub and Azure DevOps from this [GitHub repository](https://github.com/umbraco/Umbraco.Cloud.CICDFlow.Samples).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can get the samples for both `GitHub Actions` and `Azure DevOps` from the [Github repository](https://github.com/umbraco/Umbraco.Cloud.CICDFlow.Samples).
```

{% endhint %}

## Import Cloud project repository to GitHub
Go to your repositories in GitHub and click on "New".

- Create a new empty repository, and note down the clone URL.
- Go to the Umbraco Cloud Portal and clone your cloud project down locally. [This article](../../../working-locally.md#cloning-an-umbraco-cloud-project) describes how you can find the clone URL.
- Now working locally remove the Git Remote called `origin`, which points to Umbraco Cloud

 ```sh 
 git remote remove origin
 ```

- Optionally rename branch `master` to `main`

 ```sh 
 # optional step
 git branch -m  main
 git symbolic-ref HEAD refs/heads/main
 ```

> - Add a new remote called origin and pointing to the GitHub clone URL

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Add a new remote called origin and pointing to the GitHub clone URL and push
```

 ```sh 
 git remote add origin https://github.com/{your-organization}/{your-repository}.git
 git push -u origin --all
 ```

> 
> - Push local repository to Github
> 
> Now we can move on to setting up a pipeline.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Now we can move on to setting up a pipeline.

```

## Set up Github repository variables

The pipeline needs to know which Umbraco Cloud project to deploy to. In order to do this you will need the `Project ID` and the `API Key`. [This article](README.md#obtaining-the-project-id-and-api-key) describes how to get those values.

- Now go to the repository in GitHub, and click on the Settings section.

> - Expand secrets and variables in the left-hand menu titled Security and click on Actions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Expand secrets and variables in the left-hand menu titled `Security` and click on `Actions`.
```

{% hint style="info" %}
If you want to use other names for the secrets, you need to rename the `secrets` variables in each of `main.yml`'s jobs .

```yaml
jobs:
  cloud-sync:
    uses: ./.github/workflows/cloud-sync.yml
    secrets:
      projectId: ${{ secrets.PROJECT_ID }} # change the part inside the curly braces
      umbracoCloudApiKey: ${{ secrets.UMBRACO_CLOUD_API_KEY }} # change the part inside the curly braces

  cloud-deployment:
    needs: cloud-sync
    uses: ./.github/workflows/cloud-deployment.yml
    secrets:
      projectId: ${{ secrets.PROJECT_ID }} # change the part inside the curly braces
      umbracoCloudApiKey: ${{ secrets.UMBRACO_CLOUD_API_KEY }} # change the part inside the curly braces
```

{% endhint %}

Now Github is set up with the needed information to be able to run a deployment back to Umbraco Cloud.

Next up it setting up the actual pipeline.

### Allow GitHub to commit to your repository

The sample pipelines has a job called `cloud-sync`. This job is responsible for checking for changes in you Umbraco Cloud project, fetch them and apply them back to your repository. 

> In order for this to work, you need to give the GITHUB_TOKEN write permissions to the repository during workflow runs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order for this to work, you need to give the `GITHUB_TOKEN` write permissions to the repository during workflow runs.
```

> This is how you grant that permission:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is how you can grant these permission:
```

> - Working in your repository on GitHub, click on Settings in the top right
> - In the left sidebar, click on "Actions" and then on "General"
> - Scroll down to the "Workflow permissions" sections
> - Select the "Read and write permissions"
> - Click save 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Working in your repository on `GitHub`, click on `Settings` in the top right
- In the left sidebar, click on `Actions` and then on `General`
- Scroll down to the `Workflow permissions` sections
- Select the `Read and write permissions`
- Click save 
```

<figure><img src="../../../../.gitbook/assets/github-workflow-permissions.png" alt=""><figcaption><p>GitHub Workflow permissions</p></figcaption></figure>

## Set up the GitHub Actions pipeline

> While working with the project on you local machine, follow these steps to prepare the pipeline, using the [samples from the repository](https://github.com/umbraco/Umbraco.Cloud.CICDFlow.Samples).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While working with the project on your local machine, follow these steps to prepare the pipeline, using the [samples from the repository](https://github.com/umbraco/Umbraco.Cloud.CICDFlow.Samples).
```

For GitHub Actions you will need the following files:
- From the root folder
  - `cloud.zipignore`
- From the `powershell` folder
  - `Get-LatestDeployment.ps1`
  - `Get-ChangesById.ps1`
  - `New-Deployment.ps1`
  - `Add-DeploymentPackage.ps1`
  - `Start-Deployment.ps1`
  - `Test-DeploymentStatus.ps1`
- From the `powershell/github` folder
  - `main.yml`
  - `cloud-sync.yml` 
  - `cloud-deployment.yml`

{% hint style="info" %}

Download the provided sample scripts as ZIP from the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/umbraco/Umbraco.Cloud.CICDFlow.Samples/tree/main). Click on "Code" and then choose "Download ZIP". Then unzip it and use those files for the next steps.

{% endhint %}

Do the following to prepare the pipeline:
- Copy the `cloud.zipignore` file to the root of your repository
- Make a copy of the `.gitignore` from your repository and call the copy `cloud.gitignore`
  - Both files should be in the root of your repository

>   - In the bottom of the `.gitignore` add the line `**/git-patch.diff`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - In the bottom of the `.gitignore` file add the line `**/git-patch.diff`
```

- Also in the root, create a folder called `.github`
- Inside `.github` create two additional folders
  - `workflows`
  - `powershell`
- Copy the 3 YAML files from the `github` folder into the `workflows` folder
- Copy the Powershell scripts from the `powershell` folder to the `powershell` folder
- Commit the all changes, and push to GitHub

The push will start a new pipeline run.

### Optional: Run a deployment to confirm

> With everything set up, you may want to confirm that Umbraco Cloud reflect the changes you are sending via your pipeline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With everything set up, you may want to confirm that Umbraco Cloud reflects the changes you are sending via your pipeline.
```

> While working on you project locally, ad a new Document type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While working on you project locally, add a new Document type.
```

- Commit the change to `main` and push to your repository.
- The pipeline starts to run

> - Once the pipeline is done log into Backoffice on your left-most environment in cloud

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Once the pipeline is done log into Backoffice on your left-most environment in Umbraco Cloud
```

### Main

The `main.yml` is the main pipeline, and is the one that will be triggered on a push to `main` branch.
You can configure a different trigger behavior in this file.

You can add your Build and Test jobs between the `cloud-sync` and `cloud-deployment` jobs. 
Keep in mind that you do not need to retain the dotnet build artifact for upload later. The `cloud-deployment` job will take care of packaging all your source code and upload to Umbraco Cloud. 

### Cloud-sync

The `cloud-sync.yml` shows how you can sync your Github repository with the left-most environment of your Cloud project.
In this sample, it accepts any change from the API and applies and commits it back to the branch which triggered the pipeline. However the commit does not trigger the pipeline again.

If you don't want the pipeline to commit back to the triggering branch, this is where you need to change the pipeline. 

### Cloud-deployment

The `cloud-deployment.yml` show how you can deploy your repository to the left-most environment of your Cloud project.
The sample shows how to prepare for deployment, request the deployment and wait for cloud to finish.

There are a couple of things here to be aware of:

> - We are overwriting the `.gitignore` with the `cloud.gitignore`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- We are overwriting the `.gitignore` file with `cloud.gitignore`.
```

  This is a way to accommodate your gitignore-needs when working locally. For instance you might want to ignore frontend builds, but you want them build and published to cloud.  

> - We have a special `cloud.zipignore`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- We have a special `cloud.zipignore` file.
```

  This is a convenient way to tell the pipeline which files **not** to include when creating the zip package to send to cloud.

> If you have frontend assets that needs to be build (using tools like npm/yarn or others), you should add the needed steps before `Zip Source Code`. This is to ensure that the fresh frontend assets will be part of the package to be sent to cloud. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{% hint style="info" %}

If you have frontend assets that needs to be build (using tools like npm/yarn or others), you should add the needed steps before `Zip Source Code`. This is to ensure that the fresh frontend assets will be part of the package to be sent to cloud. 

{% endhint %}
```
